Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Susan Charles. She is Professor of
Psychological Science and Nursing Science in the School of
Social Ecology at the University of California Irvine. Her
research examines emotional processes across the adult lifespan. And
today we're going to talk about effective well-being emotional
function across the lifespan, emotion regulation, social relationships and
some other related topics. So, Doctor Charles, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Well, thank you. Thank you for inviting me.
So let's start perhaps with um a definition here.
So when it comes to effective well being, what
are we talking about here
exactly? Um Yes, effective well being is a, is
a term researchers use. Um AND, and people in
the community and, and society really don't accept, we
use it every day. So you know how you,
you meet someone and you say, how are you?
Um AND, and when someone asks you, how are
you doing? You, you kind of think to yourself,
how am I doing overall? Am I good? Am
I bad? And so you'll say, you know, I'm
doing well or I'm not. And that is your
effective well being. It's basically how positive you are
or how negative and, and the way we measure
this as um in our research is by asking
discreet emotions, like how happy, how, how content, how
calm and then we look at the average and
that's your overall like positivity. And so whether it's
low or high, and then we also do the
same thing for negative, you know how angry, how
sad, like uh a host of different negative emotions
and then we average those together and we look
at your positive, overall positive bucket compared to your
negative bucket and that's your overall well being.
Yeah, I I mean, isn't there a small risk
of people just sometimes lying about their own effective?
Well, because I mean, when we ask one another,
how are, how are you doing? We, we usually
say well fine but sometimes
that's not. Yeah, you're right. Maybe that's a bad
example because the society we just, we just default
to fine. Um, BUT um it is true and
sometimes we have social desirability, right? So, so you
don't wanna look bad and um, and some people
have even wondered, does that change with age? So
are you trying to, you know, to look more
socially desirable, look good at different stages in your
life? More or less
and, and talking about how things change across the
lifespan? How does emotional function change? Exactly.
Yeah. It's really um interesting because emotions when we
think of what emotions are and they're obviously cognitive
processes because it involves thinking like, how do I
feel and their behavioral processes of responding to an
emotional event, like fight or flight. Um And when
we think about our thoughts and we think about
physical fitness and you think about aging, you think,
you know, as I tell my students, there are
very few Olympians who are you who are old,
you know, so, so clearly all these, these physical
and cognitive processes decline with age. Um, AND that's
pretty, pretty normative. Um, BUT emotions actually look pretty,
pretty well preserved across the lifespan. And we, and
when we ask people, how are you or how
has your life been like in the past month,
generally older adults report similar, if not higher levels
of well being than younger. Definitely, if I would
take the average well being of a 60 year
old over a 20 year old any day because
it is higher. So, um, they're generally less negative
like they're, they're less um angry or distressed, um,
than younger people.
Well, then actually in this particular case, at least
the that common stereotype that older people tend to
experience more positive emotion seems to be correct.
Yeah. You know, it's, it's interesting, some oftentimes stereotypes
are either really positive or really negative. So you'll
have like the grumpy old man kind of uh
trope or you'll have, you know, the old witch
or you'll have like the benign, like loving grandma.
But um the truth is more of the kind
of benign look. Um WHICH is, which is great
because we tell young people, um these are the
best moments of your life and when we think
of mental health today and especially after the pandemic
of younger adults, I think it's kind of a
child abuse type thing if we ask like, if
we tell a 19 year old, you know, this
is the happiest you're gonna get, you know, that
they might think this is it, you know, which
is and it isn't. I mean, from all the
data we've seen um the older you, you get,
well, definitely like the happiest people sometimes are in
their late sixties and early seventies. So interesting.
But, but middle aged people, I mean, middle age
seems to be a bit scary. I, I mean,
I haven't got there yet. I mean, looking at
many middle aged people out there, it seems to
be a very uh I mean, uh a a
stage in life where people really go down in
terms of their uh emotions and stuff like that.
You know, it's really interesting because there's a, a
question um how satisfied are you with your life
unless, and we often see this kind of u
shaped curve where it's highest in the younger and
the middle age, but in the in midlife it
gets lower and, and so it kind of, and
even longitudinally, you'll see people go down and then
go up again and, and people have done a
lot of research to kind of reason why um
life satisfaction is more cognitive, like how is my
life going? Um And they used to think it
had to do with like when you got married,
you're happier and then you go down and then
you, and then the kids, if you have Children,
they leave the house, then you go up. But
it, but since then these, these data have been
replicated with people who are not married and you
see the same kind of dip and then the
move up. And so, I mean, there's a lot,
we we don't have a definitive answer, but there's
a lot of um speculation and for example, there's
a little mortality kind of blip in the fifties.
You see cardio, you know, like a lot of
um cardio vascular like death, like a lot of
heart attacks. I mean a lot. But you, so
especially among men, like with everyone's been healthy and
then all of a sudden like one person in
your friendship, you know, network dies about like a
heart attack as opposed to an accident. And then
you start realizing, oh people are dying for health
related reasons to join my age group. And so
that, that also triggers kind of mortality. Um So
there's a lot of speculation about why that happens.
But it, it we do see that too.
Yeah. May maybe they think, oh my God, perhaps
I don't have 30 or 40 more years ahead
of me.
Yeah. Yeah.
Uh OK. So uh since you mentioned this is
actually I wanted to ask you, do we know
what are the specific biological changes that across the
lifespan affect emotional processes?
So um it, it's interesting about brain like what
changes in the brain that would affect emotion, emotional
processes. So, um people have, have done studies looking
at um about the brain structure and changes. So
for example, what changes first in the brain with
age is the frontal lobes and the ones that
are important for processing information and judgment, decision making.
Um AND, and very important for emotion. So if
we think, oh, that's the first thing that declines
with age, that sounds pretty scary. But what researchers
have found is that um perhaps this slower reaction
time that we see with aging could benefit emotions.
I mean, if you think about it, when we
say something we regret or say something out of
anger oftentimes it's we do this quickly. And so
maybe this, this the kind of slowing actually helps
um emotional regulation. Um That's one hypothesis. Um And
of course, I do have to say that other
people have looked at older adults and the people
who have the highest function are are doing are
remembering the more positive emotions relative to negative emotions.
And there are age related um, diseases like dementia
where we see higher rates of depression. So it's
not, oh, you get worse and you get better.
That's I'm not saying that, but I'm just saying
kind of slowing down and taking things into perspective
might also have a kind of biological basis. Mhm.
So another thing that we have emotion related is
emotion regulation does that also increase with age, I
mean, not only perhaps the kinds of emotions we
experience more positive or more negative, but also uh
our ability to regulate our emotions.
Now this is a really good question because as
I said, you know, we ask older adults how
they're doing and they, they often seem similar or
if not better with age and, and yet we
do know that older, that more losses in life
are associated with older age, that people lose status
with retirement or financial, you know, their wealth. I
mean, when they retire, they don't make as much
money that, that friends, you know, you, you lose
friends through illness. And so um why is it
so they must be regulating their emotions better? But
when we, we put older and younger people in
the lab and we make them regulate their emotions.
So we get them really upset or sad or
angry or disgusted and we see how quickly it
takes them to get back to baseline. It, that's
not where we see the age related benefit. So
that looks, we see very few, actually, age differences,
people look pretty similar where we see older people,
right? Engage in processes that we think do help
daily life is that older adults are less what
we're finding in our research, they're less likely to
place themselves in situations that can turn negative. And
by, let me give you an example. So if
a younger and older person both love a favorite
restaurant and it's in L A and the traffic
is horrific. Um, AND road rage is something that
both younger and older people that everyone uniformly says
is unpleasant. Um, OLDER people might say, you know
what? I really love that restaurant, but I'm gonna
go on Saturday or I, I'm gonna eat very
early or, or later than the lunch crowd. And
so they kind of proactively in structure their lives
so that they don't get into that traffic jam
or they don't find themselves. I, if you're, if
you're talking to somebody and that conversation starts go,
like, starts leaning towards a question that you think,
ah, no, it's going towards politics and we never
get along or it looks like they're gonna start
telling a joke and I always find their jokes
offensive. Older people are more likely to, to just
to walk away or to change the topic. Um,
THEY are less likely to press on with the
conversation that is getting negative. Um, SO, so that's
what we find. So it's not really in a
bad state. It's kind of avoiding it in the
first place.
And so, in what ways do differences in effective
experience relate to things like cognitive and health related
processes.
Uh Yes. So we um have done a lot
of studies of Dave Almeida at Pennsylvania um at
Penn State. And um and I have collaborated for
over 20 years. Um AND he has a wonderful
day set looking at daily stressors of life. And
so we've looked at age differences and in that,
and we've looked at over time, um how people
respond to stress and how it relates to their
health 10 years later. And what we find is
that on days when you have a stressor and
if you say at the end of the day,
how are you feeling and your emotions really change.
So on days without a stressor, you're like, I'm
ok, but on days you have a stressor, you're
like, oh, that was awful. So the more awful
you know that you, you report the more your
emotions change in response to the stressor um that
increases your likelihood of having um a, a qua
both a physical, a chronic illness, it increases your,
your risk of physical health and it increases your,
your risk of um either anxiety or depression. So,
uh so mental health as well
and where do these differences in effective experience stem
from? Do they have to do with some sort
of individual differences, like personality or some other ways
related to information process, see the way we deal
with our own experiences in life. Uh, WHAT are
they related to?
Ah, so, um, there are, are we think there
are many differences. So it's, it can start with
just temperamental differences. So, uh, we often talk about
temperaments of dogs. For example, this dog has a
different temperament than that dog. So we see this
in animals and we see it in humans too,
with even newborn babies, them some cry easily, some
just sit and are really kind of, you know,
easy, easier to, to um to care for because
they, they don't need as much soothing. And so
we see these differences unfold across the lifespan. Some
people are frightened very easily, other people think it's
hilarious. So, um if some new like loud sound
comes into their, into their uh into their arena.
So, so we have these temperamental differences and we
do see um that these personality that unfold into
personality traits over time and we see that personality,
um certain personality traits are related to higher reactivity
to our stressors. And we also, um so from
modeling behavior, so how our parents responded, um can
also influence us and um how we're learned to,
to deal with our own emotional experiences and what
scares us or what, what's novel in the stimuli.
Like if you grow up in a place where
anything new can be potentially very dangerous for you,
then you might have a very different outlook than
someone who is raised in a bit safer environment,
for example. So a combination of, of you, what
you came into the world with and how the
world has shaped you.
And I would imagine of course, that uh earlier,
we've talked about, let's say general trends across the
lifespan. But you've also mentioned some opposite stereotypes that
we have for old people, like the grumpy old
man or the carefree old men, let's say, and
I guess that some of that would also be
the result of these individual differences, like personality, temperament
and so on.
Right. Yeah. Uh FOR, for the, you know, the
upturns, um we sometimes see especially after 65 and
some of those upturns in, in emotional distress um
can be from certain losses of physical health um
like increases in physical health problems and cognitive dysregulation
from dementia like cognitive health problems. So, um and
also certain losses. So for example, losing social support
is so important for, for everyone um for everyone's
health, but the older you are um and if
you start losing enough people, those the core people
in your, in your life that can be a
very lonely isolating experience.
But by physical health factors, I mean, what do
you mean exactly? Are you focusing on specific diseases
or for example, losing mobility or what they,
that's a really um wonderful question because and it's
interesting like just this, the concept, the definition of
healthy of success. We used to call it successful
aging and we call it healthy aging. It used
to be, you have to be free from disease.
That is a healthy aging person. Well, about over
85% of people, 65 and older have at least
one chronic condition. Um AND yet around 80% of
older adults, if you ask them, are you a
successful age? They will tell you yes. So clearly,
it's not a disease model and, and the absence
is a good thing. And the World Health Organization
actually now defines healthy aging as whether or not
you have an impairment or a co a chronic
illness. It's been able to do what you wanna
do that makes you happy and engaged in your
life. Um Now, with that said, chronic illness by
itself doesn't, isn't related to lower levels of well
being. Unless what we found is if you report
having three or four illnesses or more, then we
do see a decline in, well, we do see
differences in well being, um, lower. I mean, people
have lower levels of well being. Um, AND, and
you mentioned functional decline, you know, that inability to
climb stairs or to walk that far. And, and
that certainly we think is one of the reasons,
um, because the more the more illnesses, it just
increases the risk of, you know, the functional disability
and, um, which leads you to not be able
to do what you wanna do that keeps you
happy.
Mhm. Uh So usually if people have just for
example, one chronic disease, like, I don't know, diabetes
or um high uh blood pressure or something or
cholesterol or perhaps if they just lose some uh
functional capacity, some mobility, perhaps one single uh uh
I, I mean, a single one, those conditions probably
doesn't affect the people much or. Yeah.
Yeah, we found in, in looking at large studies,
um just the number of illness is, is definitely
correlated. However, um and you bring good point. So
it, so for example, if you said, well, you
can't really see if you take off your glasses.
So, you know, that must affect your well being
and like, well, it would if glasses weren't invented.
Um DEFINITELY, but um I don't think I could
cope with that very well. Some people might. Um
And so some people do. Um But, but I
put my glasses, I'm fine. So if someone has
high cholesterol and they take a, you know, lower
cluster, so chronic illnesses, um we think it's the
symptoms and they, and the way these illnesses might
impact their daily lives. So if you have an
illness, but you take a pill or it's is
asymptomatic and doesn't bother you, then, then we don't
see that. Um It's so, so um chronic pain
is, is especially the uncontrollable. Chronic pain can be
just devastating, just absolutely devastating. But when we look
at huge populations of people, usually we see that
a real change with that three or more chronic
conditions.
Mhm.
So,
so unless you have really a very severe condition,
like, for example, chronic pain, I would imagine that
the way you adapt to your new life also
plays a big role.
Right. Right. And, and yes, and you see some
people, um, as we say, in research, we can
predict a population but we can't predict your aunt
or your uncle or you. And so, um some
people are incredible and they cope and they do
an incredible, incredible job. I remember talking to someone
who was par who was, who had a LS
um a horrible degenerative condition where he had lost
his ability to move every part of his body
except above and he could talk and he could
kind of blink and he was so grateful for
his life and his, his partner and, and he
was happier than some of the undergraduates I see
at the college who are in peak physical condition.
And so I, I don't wanna say everyone but
for, for many people who lose that function, like
losing eyesight, for example, and not being able to
drive at night. Um AND then some people have
a social network that allows them to, to drive
them and, and so it doesn't affect their ability
to see their friends and, and, and do the
activities they want in the evening. Other people live
in places where there's public transportation that allows them
um to be more independent. Um But some people
have a real hard time, they might live in
a rural area, for example, that is related to
more problems with chronic conditions. Um BECAUSE they have
less help.
Yeah. Yeah. And it's, it's definitely many aspects of
aging are very complicated for many people out there.
So, uh but earlier you mentioned uh being exposed
to daily stressors, for example. So when that occurs,
when that's the case, do they usually have long
term physical health ramifications or not?
Um Yes. Uh We find that it does predict
um physical health problems. Um 10 years later, a
higher likelihood of having them. Um And we think
that that part of just these daily stressors is
the release of cortisol. Um So cortisol is, is
commonly referred to as a stress hormone in the
literature. We all need cortisol. It's, it's a regular
part of our body. So it's great and um
and when we have it and we need it.
So if we see something and we need to
quickly move it kind of mobilizes the body and
allows us to run away or to fight our,
our enemy or, you know, the bear that's attacking
us, you know, a millennial, you know, thousands of
years ago, our ancestors to use this to, to,
to um have the energy to fight their fears
and their stressors. Um Nowadays, a lot of our
in a in um our developed world. So a
lot of our fears and structures are not something
we fight. Um We just sit quietly in our
board room or our classroom or, you know, wait
in line at a store and have to deal
with our frustration. And we have to, sometimes we
have to smile when we're doing it. And so
we're not using this energy, just kind of sitting
in our bodies. And if we're constantly feeling stressed,
these daily stressors, like, got an argument with somebody
or there's someone who is really annoying. This is
the most common. We all have something really annoying
but you decide to let it go. Just, I'm
not gonna, I'm not gonna engage with this person.
Um, AND you have that but you're really upset
by, it really bothers you, then you're gonna have
the stress response that includes this cortisol release. And
if you have just high levels of cortisol and
no way to release it, it's, it's going to
wear, it's gonna cause wear and tear in your
body. And so, um, it's going to eventually affect
your immune system. It's not, your immune system isn't
gonna work as well. Um, FOR example, and, um,
and it, it's related to, to worse health later,
the more functional declines it's, it's related to a
lot of very bad health risks.
Yeah, when it comes to hormones, I guess it's
important for people to keep in mind that there
are no bad hormones. What is bad is if
you find them, or some of them in very
high concentrations in your blood or in particular parts
of your body where they should have been, uh,
uh, at least in those levels and some of
them in particular parts of the day because some
of them help you go to bed, go to
sleep or wake up in the morning. But perhaps
if they are in high concentrations throughout the day
and through long periods of time, that's when they
have bad consequences.
Yeah, that's an excellent point. There are no bad
hormones and in the same way, there are no
bad emotions. I, I remember reading Leo's work. Um
He's a wonderful effective neuroscientist and, and in his
um in his research, he talks about anxiety, for
example, and anxiety is a horrible, you know, if
people have anxiety disorders, it's, it's, it's a very
unpleasant, it's um very uncomfortable and yet what he
talks about is we would be alive if there
wasn't anxiety and fear because fear has motivated us
to stay safe. And so it's a very adaptive
emotion and we all need it. But it's just
when we have too much of it that it's
a problem.
And no, this is a very important point to
make here because nowadays it's very frustrating to all
the time here on social media, people bashing certain
hormones. Oh, you should do a dopamine detox. And
I'm like, man, if you don't, if you didn't
have dopamine in your brain, you wouldn't even be
able to make decisions.
Come on. Yes, sir. So, right, there's a study
where they had, um, they brought it with and,
um, and brought in pictures of their, their babies.
They, all, these women had young Children, had babies
and when they looked at their babies, um, they
had more dopamine, they, they, they isolated and they
had more dopamine And when people who are in
love, when they see their, the people they're dating,
same thing. It's like, yeah, you, you want the
person, you, you want your romantic partner to see
you and to have a little dopamine really. So
they didn't, that's not great for dating, you know,
that young love.
Yeah, you probably wouldn't feel uh much for the
person which wouldn't be at least in that context.
Yeah, for attachment.
So I, I mean, another thing that I haven't
asked you about yet is effective reactivity or perhaps
you've already touched on it on it a little
bit. But what is it? And how does it
relate to the way people deal with daily stressors
specifically?
It's interesting, you know that. So as I said,
we've talked about this daily diary and how reactive
you are to daily stressors. Um We always joke
with emotion researchers that there are as many definitions
of whatever of emotions of reactivity than there are
emotion researchers in the room. And so, so even
the reactivity at the end of the day, you
say, well, it was it is that reactivity or
is that rumination that we're still thinking about it?
So some people define reactivity as that second, you
know, that, that, that that initial response. So um
appraisal theorists, for example, will say when something comes,
you know, when, when you see some some emotional
stimulus in front of you, the first thing you,
your body, your, your brain does even before you
actually realize it is, identifies it as is it
a threat or not? And then is it good
for me or not? So these are these initial
appraisals like good, bad, you know, and so if
you, and once you do that, let's say you
say it's bad. So it's like, oh bad, then
you think is it gonna harm me? Do I
have what it takes to deal with it or
not? So you're like, OK, I can deal with
this, yes or no or like no, I don't.
So these initial, so that's reactivity for them. Um
We say you reactivity at the end of the
day, is it still bothering you? Um So, so,
so that's those are two different definitions of reactivity
that, that we can often use like initial reactivity
and then longer term reactivity.
Mhm So I would also imagine that there would
be some or at least some individual differences here
in how people respond to daily stressors, right? Or
even perhaps in certain cases, if they even consider
it a stressor or not at all.
Right. Yes. And um Richie Davidson who's a, um
affect a neuroscientist in, at Wisconsin University of Wisconsin.
Um, HE talks about the chronometer, the time chrono
for time, the chronometer of emotions. And so he
says there are individual differences in, in so many
aspects of the emotional experience. So there's differences in
like how angry you get or how happy you
get. So in that peak and then there's differences
in how slowly you recover. So if you stay
angry or do you stay, you stay happy and
you can see this, I think anyone can with
friends, they're like, oh yeah, that person takes a
long time to get upset once they're upset who
stay away or it could be the reverse like
they go from 1 to 100 and then they
go, they're fine the next day or they're fine
five minutes later. So um so we, we see
differences in um we have, we see differences in,
in even how, yeah, so how quickly people respond,
how, how long it takes them to get back
down. Um So in, in, in all of the
processes that we study, there's these wonderful individual differences.
So let's talk a little bit about social interactions
and social relationships here because of course, we as
humans value those kinds of interactions a lot because
there's many aspects of our lives that revolve around
them uh and, and sometimes we have negative social
interactions and uh we have effective responses to them.
So, are there age differences here as well in
terms of uh people's effective responses to negative social
interactions?
It's interesting because when we ask people of different
ages, um how often they have negative interactions, older
people report them a lot less often than younger
people and older people are more often to say
that a negative interaction wasn't as bad. Um Compared
to a younger person. Um Karen Ferman at UT
Austin did this wonderful study years ago where she
brought adult daughters into the lab with their mothers.
So the mothers were in like their sixties and
seventies and the daughters like there is in the
forties and she brought them in and they, she
had them do a task together that was collaborative
task. It's kind of frustrating and then she separated
them at the end and then she had them
report how was it? And so the the the
moms are like, it was great, it was wonderful
and the daughter is like, yeah, not so much,
you know, so, so even that same interaction, um
the the moms are the older, you know, women
were reporting much less negative than the the daughters.
And we see that just whenever we ask people
about negative yeah, about any interactions that older people
are less likely to say they were negative and
they report lower levels of um negativity So they're
generally like happier, we call them like happier relationships
because there's less negativity of them. So, but, but
often if you just ask how happy were you
to see somebody? Um SOMETIMES older people, especially family
members will, will report much higher levels of happiness.
But oftentimes, um but sometimes you see no differences
because um young people do like people in their
lives too.
I would imagine that the period of life where
people would report experiencing more negative social interactions would
be during their teenage years.
Right? And also um Laura Carson, who did the
socio emotional s activity theory that really addresses this.
Um She did a study years ago where she
asked people. So would you rather be with a
close friend? Um, A stranger? Um And she had
a whole different descriptions of different types of people
and, and you had to see whether you'd want
to interact with them. And one of those was
a per a person you don't really know but
you dislike and some, and she found that some
of the people in their teens, some adolescents said
they wanted to interact with that person. No older
people did none in her study. And so she
asked, she asked these young, she's like, why, why
would you want to interact with someone you know,
you dislike and the young people would say I
want to know why I dislike them. What it,
what is it about that person? I dislike, I,
I haven't seen an older person tell me that.
Um, BUT I would doubt that would happen very
often. Um, AND we don't see that happening. Very
older people generally know why they dislike people. I
mean, like, what will bother them about, you know,
a certain type of person. And so they, again,
back, going back to that so they don't engage
or seek to engage in situations where they think.
Oh, no, this is not gonna go. Well,
yeah. And I guess that with age we also
learn that it's not a problem at all. If
not everyone out there likes us, right? I, I
mean, if, if there's one or two people out
there that really dislike is whatever, it's not a
big deal.
Yes, you have that, you know, with age you,
you absolutely learn these wonderful, you know, can't please
all the people all the time and you also
have comparisons. Um uh So, so if you meet
someone, you don't like them, older people say well,
but that was nearly as bad as, you know,
when I was fired by my boss or when,
you know, they'll have this horrible situation in their
past. So they can put it in perspective too
based on their expenses.
But in your work, I, I read you talking
about things like goals, appraisals. So what would be
the roles that goals and appraisals play in our
effective responses to negative social interactions?
Well, I, I think that, you know, so a
lot of times like giving talks, people say, how
can young people be like older people? Um And
so kind of not take these, these bad things
as seriously. And, and some is what you said
is, is going to appraise that, you know, what's
possible and learning to accept what you can't change,
for example, about other people. And um but I
also say, you know, some, I, I think that
older people also in societies, again, in societies where
they have a retirement where they're, they're, they're not,
they're no longer working. Um They also have something
that younger people don't often have and that's the
ability to avoid something negative. So for example, if
you're working and there's negative people that you have
to, you know, you, you're working with some colleagues,
you don't like, you don't have the ability just
not talk to them or, you know, you don't
have uh customers really bothering you. You can't just
say, you know, I'm not gonna talk to you,
you know. So, so sometimes um young, some older
people have, you know, we have the ability to
do to, to engage or not engage whereas younger
people don't often, well, they might not. And so,
um so I, as I joke with, but people,
I think like my graduate students, they said, you
know, I don't really want to work on my
dissertation. I think I'm just gonna take the next
month off, you know, it's, I'd say no, no,
you don't have, you don't have necessarily have that
the same freedom, um, that older people have, have
gained from, from their life and their place of
where they are their role in life right now.
Mhm. Yeah. I, I guess that also when you
get old, um, I mean, there are many more
things that you don't care about anymore because, I
mean, I can't be fired anymore. I don't, I,
I don't need to impress anyone anymore. So I
will say whatever I want
and what we do find and especially, and, um,
more so for women. Um, AND then is that
you care less about what other, as you point
out that what other people think about you, it's
like, oh, they think I'm an idiot. Ok. You
know, it just, whereas younger people, they're very concerned
and it makes sense if you're thinking, well, this
person might be hiring me next week. You know,
this person might put in a bad reference for
me or, you know, so they might have to.
So. Exactly. Exactly.
Mhm. A and so I, I mean, just to
close this section before I ask you about another
topic, can we say that? Uh, AT least there's
a tendency to, for effective well-being to increase with
age.
Yes. Um, BASED on questions like how happy you
are. You know, Art Stone did a study with
almost a half a million Americans and they called
them and said today, tell me about your emotions
and the people, they, they asked people from age
18 to people in their late eighties and the
happiest people were the age 72. So, um so
overall we see well being sometimes we see a
slight, a slight kind of increase in people after
age 65. But, but generally we see the highest
rates of, of negative emotions in people in their
teens and early twenties.
Yeah. Uh AND so uh earlier you mentioned very
briefly rumination. Does that play a role in um
how levels of effective well-being change across the lifespan?
I mean, if some people uh have a a
higher tendency to ruminate compared to others, does that
have any influence there?
So, so we have um seen um in, in
studies um that when you ask people how often
they ruminate um or, or did you did, did
something bother you? Are you still thinking about it
that fewer older adults say they're doing that than
younger people? So um it's not that that older
adults handle rumination better because if you get them
to ruminate it's bad but they are less likely
to do that than younger people. And again, like
why? Um AND some people think older people are
better at letting go and saying things like what
you were imagining like, hey, can't please everyone just
let it go. Um Other people think maybe it
has it, maybe it has to do with not
like remembering better, the gist like, oh we had
a negative conversation than if you remembered every single
detail. He said this and then she said this
and then he said this and then I can't
believe they said this about me. Whereas if you
just said, yeah, this is something negative about me.
I don't remember as opposed they said that I
was, you know, and, and you remember every single
word and so some people think maybe that can
help. But, um, for, for all these reasons, we
see that perhaps again, some of them have to
be tested still. Um, BUT there, but we do
see that older people report lower levels of rein
nation, no lower levels of regret. Like, um, Carson
Bush does incredible research looking at regret and older
people have actually fewer regrets than younger people even
though they live a lot longer.
Yeah, I, I mean, in younger people, it's that
typical kind of conversation. Oh, he was there and
then he was like, and I was like, and
he was like, I was right. Oh my God.
So, uh, and I guess that rumination is also
something very highly correlated with uh mental health conditions
like depression, right?
And you think about it if so if you
have a stressor and then you don't ruminate it
if don't ruminate on it, you're like, oh, that
happened. That was bad. Let's move on your body
kind of resets. Right. And, and so it's gone,
whereas if you ruminate, you're keeping it with you,
you're keeping that stress alive. And so you think
if it's, whether it's cortisol or whether you're air
and we didn't even talk about cardiovascular activity, so
your heart rate is higher and your blood vessels
are constricted, which we know that, you know, over
time that can lead to be related to higher
incidents of hypertension. So, if you have these, so
your, your vasoconstriction, so you have high blood pressure
and your, your heart rate's going and your, your
blood pressure is going up and you're keeping it
like that for long periods of time. Um Because
you're ruminating, you're still staying angry, you're still, or,
you know, whatever emotion you will have anger and
hostility are probably the worst for health. Um, BASED
on what we've seen in the studies and you
keep that going then that's very, that's very bad
for you. I mean, think about it's, it's worse
to have vasoconstriction and like high heart rate and
really be aroused, thinking about it, then if you
just calm yourself down and, and let it go,
by the way, one concept I haven't asked you
about yet is emotional memory. What is that? Exactly?
Yeah. So, um emotional memory and that's kind of
related what we've been talking about. So it's, it's
the memories that you say, hey, remember that summer
camp you went to or that vacation you were
on or how was it? You know, so, or
that conversation you had with somebody. And so what
we find is for people, regardless of age we
call that summer camp effect that, um, it's, it's
better than it was, you know, like I had
a great time. You're like, wait a minute, you
wanna remember as soon as you got back, you
said you'd never wanna go again? Yeah. Well, you
know, so, so, so we see that most people
remember it a little better than they do at
the time. Um But we see this kind of
memory, this, this difference in how you felt at
the time versus how you talk about it. Now,
we see that it's even more positive for older
people than for younger people. So um we call
um and Laura Carson and, and Joe Michael's, Mara
Mather, they've done a lot of research on this
and they, and they were, and it's referred to
as the positivity effect. So their memories are either
more positive or they're less negative, but either way
it's, it's a more positive looking back and more
positive memory.
So we, we've talked about how people deal with
negative emotion, uh negative social interactions earlier, but how
do social relationships change across adulthood? Do they tend
to get better with time or not?
So, we think better and the, the driving theory
behind that is socio emotional selectivity theory. Um BUT
uh Laura Carson and um developed um and
by the way, tell us then a little bit
about depth uh theory for also the audience to
understand a little bit about what it refers
to socio emotional selectivity theory is a theory about
time and time perspective. And we're not talking, talking
about clock time, we're talking about how much time
people perceive is left in their lives. So we
think everyone has an awareness. Um All adults have
an awareness of how much time they have left
in their lives. This is not something you consciously
wake up in the morning and say to yourself,
but it's something that you have um that you're,
you're kind of aware of. And so when you're
younger and you see this broad and vast future,
um you have this, you have many years ahead
of you and you have to plan for those
years and you have to prepare for those years
and you have to think about what you're gonna
do in those years. And so a lot of
your goals are gonna be about information and, and
knowledge accruing for um for that vast future as
you get older, your future is, is shorter, is
getting, is, you know, the the time horizons are
um are decreasing and you have less, less time
ahead of you. And so you can shift and,
and um instead of focusing so much on this,
on gaining information and knowledge for that future, you
can then instead focus on the present and and
then by focusing on the present and focus on
emotional goals of well being, I should have said
at the beginning that so we, that socio emotional
selectivity theory states that there are two really important
goals for all social interactions. And that's gaining information
and knowledge and just enjoying being with a person,
you know, the emotional well being and and emotional
meaning. And so those are important, very important for
everyone no matter how old you are, but you're
constantly kind of gauging the relative importance of these
two goals. And so you younger, you might sacrifice
emotion more for that information, whereas older, you're more
likely to focus on the emotion rather than the
information. Um And so the older you get, the
more you really focus on this emotional meaning and
emotional well being. And so you'll make decisions about
who you want to interact with and what you
wanna do based on these increased emotional goals. And
so, for example, you might want to interact more
with close friends and family members because, you know,
they mean a lot to you and um just
like they do for younger people. But, but hey,
do you want to meet this new person? It
has this new start up company. That's really interesting,
you know, like I'd rather hang out with my,
with my, you know, Children or my grandchildren. Um
It's not as compelling to them because of their
goals um than it would be for younger. And
so as a result, um they're focused on their
emotional goals and they drive a lot of meaning
and fulfillment in these interactions and they, they report
greater happiness um selecting these skulls.
So, in regards to my original question, does that
mean then that social relationships tend to get better
across the lifespan. So
older people will report greater satisfaction with their families,
with their friends. Um They report um great desire
to want to interact, interact with them and when
they've had an argument, um then they, and you
ask them, was it resolved? Um They're more likely
to say it was resolved and they're more likely
to, um, to not be, you know, to, to
not be bothered by them as, as, as much
a report that they haven't been. So, so overall,
like every way we ask them, it's always better
for older people, better relationships, happier when, you know,
when they're with relationships, few arguments not as upset.
So, so we do think that relationships are better.
Mhm.
So, of course, there's lots of research on the
benefits of having social relationships or social circle and
even in terms of the health benefits themselves, it
seems that if people at least have a few
close friends and family, then they tend to age
better even in terms of their physical health. Uh
But is that really always the ca, I mean,
is it always the case that having low social
ties relates to better health in old age. I
mean, do they always come for benefits or not?
Yes, I think so. Yes. And let me see
problems with the social relationships with older people. Um,
IT'S those super close people, the, the people that,
as we define, who are those people in your
life that if they were to disappear, your life
would never be quite the same. It's always about
four or five people. People put their parents in
there, people put their partners, their Children. Um, IF
they have like, their close best friend or two,
when that group gets to be two or fewer
than that, that affects their well being. So, um,
socio, emotional selectivity theory says that our huge network
of social people in their lives decreases with age,
but not that inner core. Um, AND yet if
that inner core diminishes and there's no people to
replace those people. Um, SO, like, if your best
friend dies, you never, you never find someone, a
good friend of yours that becomes your best friend
or a new person that becomes your best friend
that, that, um, and that core gets smaller and
smaller. That, that is a problem. Mhm.
But, but I mean, I would imagine that what
really matters is for people to have a couple
or a few close people, close friends. Right. I
mean, iii, I wouldn't imagine that you get even
more benefits if you try to have like 100
friends or so, I mean, uh, a certain point
it doesn't matter anymore. Right. You don't get more,
be added benefits. And, uh, I would imagine that
perhaps you, you would be sacrificing, uh, some more
closeness with a few people just to spend more
time with those other people.
That's a good question. I've never, I've never seen
a study looking at like, who are those inner
core and, like, the differences in size other than
if it gets to be two or, or feet
or one or zero, that's the problem. But if
it's three or more you're good. But I've never
seen a study looking at like, how, you know,
if there's a different problems with having more or
less than, besides the two.
Yeah. No, I, I mean, I was just asking
that out of curiosity because, you know, nowadays, particularly
with social media, you go to Facebook, you have
500 friends there and people care a lot about
that and some, and there are highly social people
that, uh, I have, uh, I don't know, hundreds
of acquaintances or something like that. But I, I
guess that uh, like at least 9095 probably more,
a higher percentage of those people are just people
who, with whom you have positive social interactions, but
it's not really close friendships.
Right. Absolutely. No. Absolutely. And that's those, exactly those
people you're describing are exactly the people that you
see decline the most with age are these peripheral,
they call them, these purple friends and, and that's
where you see older people are reporting far fewer
than younger.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, I, I mean, I guess
that after this interview, uh, I'm really, I feel
better that I'm already ahead of my teenage and,
uh, my, uh, twenties, uh, years. So, but, and
I, I'm also looking forward to my sixties, I
guess, but I'm still a little bit scared of
my forties because you haven't convinced me that
middle age
will be a good thing.
Well, it's interesting, like one of the Laura Carson's
first studies that really introduced sociological activity theory was
this your social network gets smaller. And so we
see this as an old age thing, but she
started seeing this, this kind of select selection and
it wasn't that people are saying, oh, I want
friends. I don't have them. It was like these
are the people in my network and I'm really
happy with them. She started seeing this in, in
the people in their thirties. So this was a
gradual linear experience across age. It wasn't like all
of a sudden you're 65 and you're like, ok,
no more friends, you know. So, so, and, and
at least this part, you shouldn't be scared about
the social because the social is you're more selective.
You're keeping it like fine wines, you're like putting
out all the, the bad stuff that you're just
keeping that really good stuff.
Yeah. And no, I, I actually like that. I
actually like a fewer people because it's really bothersome
to try to make plans with. I don't know
what number of people out there. I mean, it's
just too much for me at least. So. Yeah.
So I, is there anything else, uh, just that
you would like to add that perhaps we have
missed in our conversation just as, I don't know,
a final message about effective well being across the
lifespan or, or not.
Um, NO, I, um, you know, older, old age
is generally a pretty good time for a life
or emotional well being, um, uh, older people, at
least in countries like Portugal and the United States
and, and North America, Western Europe. Um, THEY, um,
luckily have these safety nets of retirements that where
they, they can get some social security if somehow
and so life is pretty good. Um, THEY do
see studies comparing like eastern Europe with Western Europe
and, and when you live in a place where
you don't have that old age looks a little
different. So I don't want to say, oh, old
age is great for everyone. It's like, well, if
you live in a war torn area or if
you live in some countries in Eastern Europe that
don't have the social security and the financial safety
nets that, that you do, you don't see the
well being getting better with age, but in countries
that do have that you do see it. And
so it's a wonderful, it's, it's a wonderful testament
to only, it's like the context of aging. It's
a wonderful testament to countries that do have that
do prioritize taking care of, um, all of its
citizens that we see a healthy aging.
I mean, actually that's a great point because at
least in more developed societies with lower birth rates
and all of that and aging populations, we're seeing
more of this phenomenon of loneliness in old age
and just told people being, I guess abandoned and
I guess that wouldn't really be good at all
for their physical or mental health.
Yes. And just, yeah, we see that loneliness is
actually lower in the sixties. I just met people
in their twenties. But after 85 that's when you
see loneliness is a, is a problem for older
adults. Yeah. Yeah. And, yeah. Ok.
So let's keep that in mind. And just before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you when your work on the
internet?
So, um, yes. Well, if you, if you look
at my web page, um, I'll try to update
it and it's at UC I, um, also if
you go into Google Scholar and just put my
name, Susan T Charles, you can find articles and
a lot of them are, are free and available
to read if you, if you want to do
that too. Um, SO those are the two places
I'd suggest.
Ok, great. So I'm leaving that in the description
of the interview for people to check them out.
And Doctor Charles, thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been really fun to talk to you.
Well, thank you and thank you for uh focusing
on aging because it's a fantastic area.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall,
Herz J and Lain Jung Y and the K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S friends, David
Sloan Wilson Yasa, dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo, Stass,
Nale me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca Lati Gilon Cortez or Solis. Scott Zachary.
Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki,
Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore de le Junior, Old
Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley
Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler,
Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Benedikt Muller, Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all